---
date: 2023-05-23
title: Compulsory Acceleration
layout: post
---

Over the past few decades there has been a notable speed-up in the pace of life. This acceleration is seemingly unbounded affecting communication, consumption, production, even emotion. We talk about certain times having particularly acute acceleration: the 80s, y2k, the advent of the internet, smartphone, and social media, and more recently the pandemic. These seem to trigger simultaneous reactions of excitement for the future and horror of how it might or did change our lives.

The acceleration has brought on highly identifiable negative real-world effects: Supply chain breakdown, ecological disaster, and a progressively waning mental health. During covid we saw these all tied together, relating back to a singular cause -- a first since Raeganism/Thatcherism which even still was amorphous in its connection. These effects were clearly visible not when the world at large had shut down, but when it started back up again. We saw the increase in pollution by the factories, the lack of supplies due to just-in-time production, and the stress of being re-introduced into public life without having had the ability to recover from the mental anguish caused by isolation.

We know that _at some level_ there is a maximum physical rhythm at which we can operate. Loading a cargo container takes several hours, loading the ship can take a few days; it takes about 20 years for a pine tree to reach maturity; and the stress hormone cortisol takes 10-20 minutes to fully kick in. Each of these can be framed as a sort of atomic element that comprise larger systems: Ships and containers comprise the volume of trade lanes, trees make up timber (shipped in those lanes), and reactions (to stress or otherwise) constitute moods and subjective realities (affecting loggers, shippers, etc.)

Since each of these systems operate along an axis of time and are affected by what comes before them (i.e. they are _stateful_,) they are subject to snowball effects. Pile-ups which have compounding effects both internal to themselves and external in the systems which rely on them.

When those pile-ups happen, everything operates worse. Individual 'complexity' causes systemic breakdown. Ships sitting at the port causes delays not only for future sailings but for down-stream deliveries. Constant lumbering causes water temperatures to increase, disruption to animal habitats and soil erosion (external,) and worsening timber yields (internal.) Raised stress levels affect reaction times (e.g. of cortisol; internal,) and rage responses causing driving to be increasingly unsafe (external.)

That reaction time is specifically important. Losing the ability to consider alternative choices is something we actively protest in professional environments because of it's ill-effects in _the long term_. However, in the pursuit of _doing more faster_ we've lost any sense of finality. We've never _arrived, finished,_ or _had enough_ because there is always more to have or do.

Without a sense of finality there is never a 'time for reflection.' Increasingly the only time we even consider reflection is after an even which has inherent finality -- usually a tragic one. A lack of reflection becomes a lack of history, life becomes a series of disparate and unconnected moments. Future decisions now uninformed by a forgotten history.

Our brains are exist on a temporal axis as much as anything: it is the repetitive firing of neural pathways which builds our understanding, behavioral patterns, and sense of self. Whether we reflect or not, this is a history that has lasting effect; like erosion patterns on a mountain. It is unsurprising, then, that when we are not actively engaged in directing how our thought patterns build up -- not reflecting -- we develop dopamine-seeking behavior.

This dopamine seeking behavior is something we actively recognize when we talk about mental health. However, those discussions are rarely interested in the _sociological_ causes of those disorders and almost exclusively talk in terms of the individual. This is where the capital motive becomes crucial: systemic health crises cannot be commodified, but individual healthcare can.

This is why individuals (fully capable of reflection, self control, etc) participate in this system seemingly opposed to their own self interest. As individuals they are _opposed_ to acceleration because of it's harmful impact on life, but simultaneously _imperatively proponents_ of that system for its economic benefit. The core value of the system (now ontological, having fully enveloped the culture) is to _have more._ The lack of finality rearing its head again here as _more_ will never be enough.

Is this acceleration _actually_ beneficial? Not in a 'net gain/loss' to society sense, but through the lens of utility. Are the 'economic wins' reality or are they just _symbols_, pictures of a private jet on the runway before checking in to an economy flight?

The counterpart to production most often considered is consumption (which already raises significant questions when industries like fashion are considered,) however when we look at _destruction_ as a counterpart the alarm bells are deafening. Entropy will eventually cause everything to end up destroyed, but the time between that production and destruction is a life of usefulness. When that life is reduced by half but we've increased the units produced by a factor of two has anything _really_ accelerated? In terms of materials consumed and waste produced undeniably we have, but what about utility?

These types of 'accelerations' are no doubt celebrated -- usually by increased stock price -- despite their lack of utility value. What is actually being celebrated is a form of sign value, the appearance of success. There are many examples of this which did not even result in an increase of profit or even revenue for the company in question (a chief example of this is hollywood accounting.) Similar effects happen around productivity and decentralization -- 'initiatives' are celebrated for their accomplishments without ever _achieving_ anything.

The ubiquitous line repeated by every news anchor, PR representative, and C-Suite executive is that the acceleration is "to keep up with consumer demand." Without a time to reflect on why that demand suddenly exists, the reality that it was created by the company who now has to do the 'keeping up' is missed entirely. A highly potent example of this is the startup mental health service archetype that exploded around the pandemic. 'Everyone needs a therapist,' one service touted through ads placed on thousands of podcasts, youtube channels, subway ads and more. The trick of course being that no one is going to say you _don't_ need a therapist, so either you agree or you fall out of line with the cultural zeitgeist.

The consumer demand being touted then is not actually causal, but rather symptomatic of the system at play. The indefinite postponement of reflection keeping the public from ever being able to consider an alternative and erasing the memory of a difference in status-quo. Captialism takes root as an essential reality, not perfect but the best we've got. Don't like it? Come up with a different solution on your own time -- whenever that may be.

Others assure us that _capitalism_ isn't the problem, it's the lack of regulation. Also, that lack of regulation has essentially resulted in a corporate-controlled government, so you likely can't do anything to regulate it. At this point the idea of a 'self-regulating market' seems laughable enough to not even get a real mention.

There are others, especially surrounding climate activism, who state "Everyone is responsible." If this is the case, there is effectively no one to _hold_ responsible. There is no subject to act on, hold accountable, or measure a change in. It is the fabric between us (the systemic) which creates the catastrophe, but we are the constituent components of that system. We are both the oppressor and the oppressed.

The underlying motive for the system of values that creates the oppressive system is the value of _more_ -- of _acceleration_. The issue with capitalism is not inherently in the 'capital' but in the 'ism.' In the centering of all of life, culture, and society around capital.

The question of what to do about it becomes a question of deceleration. Rather than attempts of reform which have continuously failed throughout the twentieth century, we have to radically change cultural viewpoints at the ground level. It is people who constitute the oppressive systems, and worldviews which regulate their actions.

To a limited extent the climate activists are right here. Certainly climate change will not be 'solved' by carpooling, but carpooling may instill a value that the environment is worth saving. Unfortunately the atomicized and individualist culture now ubiquitous in the west puts a value of moving slower as firmly in the counter-culture, but the counter-culture may be aided by political unrest as the grasp of capitalism on laborers demands more, faster.
